src/posts/2014-04-19-pyqubits-v0.1.markdown, before:

---
title: pyqubits v0.1
author: Noon Silk
---

So for some research I'm currently doing I wanted to be able to simulate a
little quantum enrionment where I could measure particular states in
particular bases.

There are a few quantum simulation environments around:

  * [jsqubits](https://github.com/davidbkemp/jsqubits) (JavaScript),
  * [quipper](http://www.mathstat.dal.ca/~selinger/quipper/) (Haskell),
  * [QuTiP](http://qutip.org/) (Python),
  * [qitensor](http://www.stahlke.org/dan/qitensor/) (Python),

but I decided to ignore each of these for different reasons. Mostly I didn't
see how to do what I wanted to do immediately, in any of them, and also
because I wanted to see what would be involved in doing such a thing.

So to this end I have published v0.1 of
[pyqubits](https://github.com/silky/pyqubits).

At the moment, everything is very simple. States can be created like so

``` python
rom pyqubits.statefuncs import state

s0 = state("0")
s1 = state("1")
```

and measurement outcomes can be obtained like so

``` python
from pyqubits.statefuncs import state, measurePurely
from pyqubits.bases import Computational

s0 = state("+1")
(a, s) = measurePurely(s0, basis=Computational)

print("a", a)
print("s", s)
```

and that's really all you can do that the moment! If you use it, feel free to
email [me](https://sites.google.com/site/noonsilk), and report any
issues/feature requests on the github page: [pyqubits
issues](https://github.com/silky/pyqubits/issues). With any luck, in later
posts I'll add a bit more, and comment on how I am using it!

Commit message:

deprecated pyqubits because it sucks.

src/posts/2014-04-19-pyqubits-v0.1.markdown, after:

---
title: pyqubits v0.1
author: Noon Silk
---

**Note, 22-May-2015: I've deprecated this repository/code for now, as it is not useful.**

So for some research I'm currently doing I wanted to be able to simulate a
little quantum enrionment where I could measure particular states in
particular bases.

There are a few quantum simulation environments around:

  * [jsqubits](https://github.com/davidbkemp/jsqubits) (JavaScript),
  * [quipper](http://www.mathstat.dal.ca/~selinger/quipper/) (Haskell),
  * [QuTiP](http://qutip.org/) (Python),
  * [qitensor](http://www.stahlke.org/dan/qitensor/) (Python),

but I decided to ignore each of these for different reasons. Mostly I didn't
see how to do what I wanted to do immediately, in any of them, and also
because I wanted to see what would be involved in doing such a thing.

So to this end I have published v0.1 of
[pyqubits](https://github.com/silky/pyqubits).

At the moment, everything is very simple. States can be created like so

``` python
from pyqubits.statefuncs import state

s0 = state("0")
s1 = state("1")
```

and measurement outcomes can be obtained like so

``` python
from pyqubits.statefuncs import state, measurePurely
from pyqubits.bases import Computational

s0 = state("+1")
(a, s) = measurePurely(s0, basis=Computational)

print("a", a)
print("s", s)
```

and that's really all you can do that the moment! If you use it, feel free to
email [me](https://sites.google.com/site/noonsilk), and report any
issues/feature requests on the github page: [pyqubits
issues](https://github.com/silky/pyqubits/issues). With any luck, in later
posts I'll add a bit more, and comment on how I am using it!
